[AUDIO LOGO]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> I'm radio and television
host, Jimmy Church.
And I'm here to uncover
the truth about some
of life's biggest mysteries.
If this is revealed,
everything has to be rewritten.
My guest today is John Michael
Godier, a science communicator
and futurist whose
documentaries explore
advanced technologies and the
mysteries of the universe.
>> There's probably life out.
There there's probably
a lot of life,
and there's probably
intelligent life.
That's why I look for it.
>> Technical assistant Josh--
>> Josh, can you
pull up the map?
>> --also joins us to
help set the scenes.
Join us as we deep dive to
get to the bottom of some
of the most intriguing
questions of our time.
>> Do you think there will be an
announcement about alien life?
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Welcome to "Into the Vortex."
I'm your host Jimmy
Church, and this
is an exciting time for all of
humanity with the James Webb
Space Telescope.
Josh, today we have
John Michael Godier.
Are you ready for this?
>> I'm excited the implications
about the telescope are
profound, and I'm excited
to hear more from you.
>> Yeah.
>> Absolutely extraordinary.
And welcome, John.
But we got to go straight here.
What is the James
Webb Space Telescope?
>> A long time in coming because
it has taken several decades
to get this telescope to become
a reality after initially
planning and funding it.
But it had cost overruns and
took a very, very long time
to get right.
However, once it
was launched, which
was a picture perfect
launch, it was truly perfect.
Nothing went wrong
with the launch
and the deployment of Webb.
It had over 250
possible failure points,
and not a single
thing went wrong.
The telescope deployed
and positioned itself
at L2, which is a
gravitational point that's
advantageous for a
telescope like this,
and began test photography
a few months ago.
Now, we are at the point where
actual science is being done,
and we're getting the first
images from the telescope.
And they're
spectacular, beating out
anything we've ever had before.
>> Now, the stated mission is to
look for extraterrestrial life
out there, not only
in our Milky Way,
but throughout the universe.
In your view, what do you
think the stated mission is?
>> Well, the stated
mission for James W.
Webb Space Telescope is
effectively to study many
different astronomical phenomena
using the infrared spectrum.
So it will do a
variety of science,
but including in that is
looking for exoplanets.
Because this
telescope is uniquely
suited for being able
to try to characterize
the atmospheres of
exoplanets-- distant ones.
And if you can do
that-- and it's
done by these planets passing
in front of their star
blocking a little bit
of light and coloring
that light with
their atmosphere,
which allows the
scientists to look
at the spectroscopy of
this exoplanet's atmosphere
and see what it's made up of.
Well, if you start seeing weird
levels of oxygen and methane,
things that shouldn't
be there-- we
call them disequilibriums, where
the oxygen should be present.
It should react with
everything and rust everything
and do all of these
sorts of things.
But if something is
replenishing that,
as what happens here on Earth,
what's doing that here on Earth
is plant life.
So that would be
a good indicator
that there is some type of
biosphere on that exoplanet
if you start seeing
those weird levels.
The other things that you may
see are things like CFCs--
artificial chemicals
in an atmosphere
that might tell you
that possibly there
is an extraterrestrial
civilization burning
a hole in their ozone
layer with that.
That was freon, essentially.
And those are the
types of things
that James Webb
can start to look
for to try to get
some idea if there
is a technosignature there.
But fundamentally, it
will try to characterize
all types of
exoplanet atmosphere
so that we got a
sampling of what
atmospheres are possible on
exoplanets in the universe.
And that will be
one thing it does.
But it will also
fundamentally look
at the very furthest
reaches of the universe
that it can at the very
beginning, just after the Big
Bang, and look at
the earliest galaxies
and how they formed, and
even the earliest stars.
There are stars
that we hypothesize
exist called Population III
stars that are very, very
early, have only mostly
hydrogen and helium in them,
were amongst the first
stars in the universe.
And through
gravitational lensing,
we can actually see
examples of these.
One of them is known as
Earendel, which is a candidate,
and see what the very
earliest universe looked like,
as far as galaxies and stars go.
>> Let's jump back for a second.
You mentioned biosphere.
What is a biosphere?
>> You live in one.
Essentially, it is
an atmosphere that
is conducive for
life, a biogenesis,
to arise in and then adapt.
Because what life
on Earth did was
it started with Earth's
original atmosphere
and then oxygenated it.
So once we had the very
simple anaerobic life
arise on this planet, it
started producing oxygen
once it hit photosynthesis.
And that oxygenated
our atmosphere,
giving a very reactive
element for more complex life
to evolve.
And that's how we ended up
here is through that very, very
long-- billions of years
long process of Earth
changing its own
biosphere in order
to be more habitable for life.
Unfortunately, that didn't
benefit the very earliest life
on Earth, which oxygen
is poisonous to them.
So they now live
deep below the Earth
where there is no
oxygen and they--
>> So we're looking
essentially for other Earths?
>> Absolutely.
Yeah.
>> And a technosignature,
which we hear this a lot today,
and the imagination just
goes with what that may be.
What is a technosignature
and why would we look for it?
>> Well, a biosignature
is the sign of life.
You're looking for
algae and plants
because those would be the
most obvious signatures.
With a technosignature,
you're looking
for the mark of a civilization.
You're looking for
the mark of technology
on the signal you see
with the telescope.
And there are many
ways this can happen.
Radio astronomers look
for radio signals.
And here, we're looking for
visual cues at exoplanets
with JWST to try to determine
if there is a technosignature
that we can tease out of that.
And, of course, that
remains to be seen.
But if you see
something weird, there
are things that
it could pick up.
>> Today, we understand now that
every star that we can see from
our backyard has at
least one planet.
This is an assumption now that
was fantasy just 20 years ago.
We still were wondering if
there were other planets
beyond our solar system.
Now, we know that every star
has a planet next to it.
The James Webb Space Telescope,
their deep field image--
Josh, can you pull
up the deep field?
>> Certainly.
>> When we look at the
deep field as opposed
to Hubble's original deep field
image, and we look at this.
First, we see a collection of
galaxies that goes on nearly
to infinity.
And each one of those
galaxies has 50 billion
to a trillion stars in it.
And each one of those
stars has a planet.
So we are potentially
looking at in this image
hundreds of trillions, trillions
of trillions of planets.
And it goes on
nearly to infinity.
>> It is possible that planets
actually outnumber stars
in the universe.
We don't know yet.
But it is possible that if--
each one of those stars--
each one of those galaxies
of 100 billion suns or more
may have more than
just one planet.
They may have eight
planets like ours does.
If enough of those
happen, then planets
outnumber even stars and the
observable universe, which is
a staggering amount of planets.
There is no possible
way that this
could be the only one like
this that's inhabited.
>> Are you of the same mind--
you've been writing about
science and reporting on it
not only in our community,
but through other media
outlets for many years.
Are you now on board with
where science is today,
that there is not only life
out there, but infinite life,
and we have no idea how much
life is actually out there?
>> I would take the position
that I'm skeptical that we
would be alone.
How could that be?
I mean, how could that be?
If we were alone
in the universe,
just generally
speaking, this would
be like the island from Lost,
where chemical processes happen
here and nowhere else.
And I don't think that
gets mentioned enough,
that when you say that
we are probably alone,
that's a tall order.
Because why should
we be special?
Why should this
planet be magical?
It'd be a unicorn.
So it's completely reasonable
to say there's probably
life out there.
There's probably a lot of
life, and there's probably
intelligent life.
It would not surprise me.
That's why I look for it.
>> Is the James Webb Space
Telescope the pinnacle--
the highest point of our
technology to this point?
Is this the most extreme thing
that we have developed yet?
>> It's our best, most
capable instrument to date,
but it will eventually
be superseded.
There's bigger we can do.
We can do all sorts of things.
If you really want to search for
extraterrestrial intelligence,
build a radio telescope on the
far side of the moon, where
you're blocking all
radio signals from Earth,
and you're only hearing
that from space.
There are many
directions we could
go to continue this search.
It's just that James
Webb's got a good chance
of finding something.
And the amount of mysteries,
just natural mysteries,
that'll come from this
telescope is staggering.
>> Now, I don't think that
most people understand
the importance of what is
actually going on here.
It's one thing to
find an exoplanet.
But it's another thing
to be able to peer
into that exoplanet atmosphere
that is uncountable light
years away.
We obviously cannot see it, but
we can through the James Webb,
and look at its atmosphere and
see what is happening on that
planet.
>> Well, even if you don't
see a biosignature or anything
that's suggesting life, we still
don't know what atmospheres are
possible on exoplanets.
We see the atmospheres
of our solar system.
But what else is possible that
we don't have an example of?
What interesting
scientific profiling,
which is important
to people like me,
science fiction
authors, where you
want to try to imagine
what alien planets look
like up close.
Well, what does a different
atmospheric makeup mean?
Do you even need the
atmosphere that we
have for a situation for life?
Or could some weird other
mix of gases happen?
So those questions are all open.
>> Now, you have the ability
yourself to look at the data
as it's coming in and what
is currently being observed
by the James Webb
Space Telescope.
What can you tell me about
some of the focus of projects
right now and what
they are looking at?
>> It is very,
very comprehensive.
That telescope is constantly
observing right now,
and the schedules of
observation are being published.
So it's looking at everything
from the TRAPPIST-1 planets,
which are obviously
of great interest,
all the way to distant galaxies.
It's spending time on
everything to give a nice mix
to the scientists requesting
research time on the telescope.
That's not to say
that James Webb--
if you see another Oumuamua
or something like that,
that telescope can turn on it on
a dime and make an observation.
They leave that in.
There's built-in time for
opportunistic observations.
But the comprehensiveness
of the schedule
shows just how capable
the telescope is.
So for a few hours it'll
look at exoplanets-- various
exoplanets.
For a few more hours it'll
look at a very distant galaxy.
A few more hours,
something else.
And then it might turn
towards Jupiter, whatever.
They're very dynamic.
>> I want to look at some other
images real quick before we
continue.
Let's look at
Stephan's really quick.
And this-- I want
your comments here.
This is an extraordinary image.
And my question has always been,
how did we look at this before,
and what do we see, and
what's the difference here?
And what is actually going on?
This is a pretty amazing image.
>> That is a group of galaxies
interacting and colliding
galaxies called
Stephan's Quintet.
And what you're seeing
there is one of the galaxies
is not involved.
It's a foreground object.
But the other three you can see
are intermixing and interacting
with each other--
trading stars.
There are planets
and stars being
traded between those
galaxies gravitationally.
And what you're seeing is
that a sort of collision.
It's very slow, coalescing.
Now, what's different between
images we've seen of this--
and this particular
group of objects
was discovered in
the 19th century.
We've known about it
for a very long time.
What we're seeing is,
number one, in infrared,
which gives you details
that you normally
wouldn't see because visible
light can be blocked by dust.
Infrared makes it through
much more efficiently,
and you can actually see
through these dust clouds
and see what's in there.
So you get a much,
much greater ability
to see stuff going on there.
And it's at much
higher resolution
than we've ever
photographed before.
>> This next image
IC 5332, Josh.
>> It's an extraordinary image.
That is an infrared
image of a Galactic core.
And you can see all of the
filaments of gas and dust
and star-forming
regions in that.
And you can see that they--
how they're interacting.
And astronomers can look
at that and determine
the Galactic
evolution that's going
on there as stars form and all
sorts of things happen there.
>> So Galactic core.
You mean, that's the
beginning of a galaxy?
>> That is the very
center of a galaxy.
>> As it's forming?
>> Mm-hmm.
And we happen to see
this one face-on.
So you're looking at
it basically face-on.
And you're looking
at the exact center.
Now, I don't know anything
about this particular galaxy,
but there's probably a
supermassive black hole
right in the center.
>> Yeah, I was just
noticing the same thing,
and that was my comment.
But again, every speck
of light that we see here
is a sun, a star,
with a solar system.
>> Yeah.
And the number is
just astonishing.
I mean, I think
there's something
on the order in the observable
universe of 246 trillion stars.
Well, a certain percentage
of those, like 90-something%
are red dwarfs, which we
think might be habitable.
Then another few percent
are orange dwarfs-- type K
orange dwarfs.
And then you get
our sun, a type G.
That's the majority of
those stars are habitable.
It's-- again, the numbers just
don't allow us really to be
alone, especially-- and it can
get worse because we don't know
what the geometry
of the universe is.
But it appears to be a sort of
flat geometry, as they call it.
And that just simply means
that if you run a railroad
track across the universe,
the tracks will never meet.
So it's a-- just a geometry
just like we're familiar with.
It seems to be flat.
That could have the implication
of three different geometries,
but one of them is infinite.
And if the universe is infinite,
there's not only alien life,
there are exact
copies of us outside
of the observable universe, and
there are an infinite number.
>> Two.
>> What are they pointed at now?
And before you answer,
is there something
that you're not
comfortable talking about,
in that they are
looking at something,
and they are suspecting
life on that planet.
And today, I'm here to tell
you what planet that is.
>> Well, I can give you a
number of them that are hinting.
Mars and Venus both
are hinting strongly
at at least microbial life.
Probably nothing
greater than that.
We don't know about Europa.
There's hints there.
And Enceladus, for that matter.
Because those ice shell
moons contain entire oceans--
more liquid water than
Earth has in Europa.
So there are candidates
for biosignatures.
And there are also candidates
for technosignatures.
I'd say probably
the one that needs
the biggest follow-up is a star
known as Przybylski's star.
And this was
discovered in the 1960s
as having a very chemically
anomalous makeup.
A team in Russia went
and took another look
at this star thinking, well,
that was a pretty weird star.
We should take a look.
They looked at it, and they
found transuranic elements
in it-- plutonium and higher
in the periodic table that
shouldn't exist in those
numbers in nature, suggestive
of physics, of some type
of island of stability,
where there's a stability way
up there that things decay down
and come down to.
The thing is, you need
something making that.
You need a neutron star
bombarding this otherwise
normal star to get some kind
of nuclear weirdness going,
and that isn't occurring.
So why this thing--
this is the only star
we've ever seen that has
these elements in it.
If they are indeed there and
it's not a measurement problem,
well, that could be a
technosignature very easily.
And it was actually advanced as
a technosignature-- plutonium
and a star, salting a
star with plutonium,
by Carl Sagan and
Joseph Shklovsky
way back in the 1960s,
that if you ever
saw that, it's a
good technosignature.
>> You've been writing
about this for so long now.
Do you have a
favorite star, if you
were a betting man,
that would have a planet
with extraterrestrial life?
>> Do I have a favorite one?
Well, I think the best chance
is the TRAPPIST-1 planets--
the three that are within
the habitable zone.
But there are others.
There are other ones that could
have surface liquid water.
But my favorite candidates are
right here in the solar system
because they hint
and hint and hint.
And that would be
Mars and Venus.
Because you just
see things that--
it's just too earthlike.
You start seeing phosphine
in Venus's atmosphere, which
has survived peer review.
It's there.
There's not very
many things that can
create that except microbes.
And there you would
have-- if it's present.
If it turns out
there's microbial life
in the upper
atmosphere of Venus,
you have a very, very
different history of life
there than you do here on Earth.
But it does kind
of give you clues
on what it's going to be like
hundreds of millions of years
in the future here
on Earth as life
tries to adapt to a dying star.
>> Let's get into hypotheticals
here for a second.
If we are at this
peak of technology
and this exciting
time of peering out,
and it seems that
everything that we
look at now not
only has a planet,
but it's in the
Goldilocks zone, and we've
got too much to study now.
That's where we are.
But ET must be going through
the exact same thing.
They have their own version of
the James Webb Space Telescope.
They're looking out
into the universe
and across the Milky Way.
And they see our Earth.
They see our planet.
Depending on how far
away they are from us,
they could see us
nearly in real time.
They could see nearly you and I
having this conversation right
now.
Or they could look at the
distant past and dinosaurs
and extreme methane
going on in this planet.
But they would be
doing the same thing.
They are looking out
for planets with life.
>> They are.
And before I dig into that,
one odd thing about this
is that because a
telescope can only
work a certain way, like an
infrared telescope like James
Webb, it can only
operate a certain way.
So if you have an alien
civilization with science,
their telescope, at
least superficially,
is going to look a
lot like James Webb
because they're using the
same physical principles.
So if you ever want
to see what maybe
a piece of alien
technology might look like,
a radio telescope or
an optical telescope
is a good candidate
because they work
on rules that are common
to the entire universe.
Now, what they would see is
that every civilization doing
science with a large enough
telescope in the Milky Way
galaxy knows this planet
has a biosphere because it's
been screaming an oxygen methane
biosphere, a very unnatural one
outside of the context of
nature itself instead of life,
for billions of years.
The entire galaxy
has seen this planet,
and is aware that it's
here and hosts a biosphere.
What they can't see is
us because we've only
been producing technosignatures
for about 100 years--
a little longer.
And the radio waves
and indications of that
haven't propagated
out far enough.
They're only out
about 100 light years.
And so most of the
galaxy has not--
doesn't know that we're here.
They just would know that
there's a biosphere here.
>> Now, If that's the
case and they visit,
would we know what
we are looking at?
Would we understand that we
were looking at a species?
And certainly, it would
indicate thousands of species,
not just one, if they
all know that we're here.
Would we know what
we are looking at?
>> Well, that's a good question
because we only have a sampling
of one.
We know what we look like.
OK.
Put it this way.
If it doesn't look like
anything you're familiar with,
you're never going to see it.
You'll just miss it.
You know, it's--
>> Why?
>> Well, because you don't have
any indicators on what to look
for.
We can think of a Dyson
sphere, so we look for that.
We can think of radio waves,
so we can look for that.
But what about things like a
nanotechnological cloud where
this civilization has uploaded
itself into this nanotechnology
cloud?
We have absolutely no idea
what that would look like.
We're just-- haven't
thought that far ahead,
so we don't know
what to look for.
So it just depends.
Because as Arthur Clarke
once said long ago,
"Any sufficiently
advanced technology
will appear as magic."
Well, there is
some wisdom to that
because we don't know
what they can do.
What's a-- what would our
civilization's technology
look like in a million years?
I mean, you can't really
extrapolate out that far.
So it may be that
we're invisible,
and that we live in a cloud
uploaded to a supercomputer.
And you'd never see that
anywhere outside of Earth.
So you just don't know.
But what you can do is
take shots in the dark
based on what you can
predict that they might do.
And that's all you've got.
>> Would we see them coming in
that faster than light travel--
well, then we wouldn't see them
coming until they were here.
If they're folding space, or
if there's a wormhole involved,
if they're ejecting out of
the back side of a black hole,
we wouldn't see
them arrive either.
So that's a weird
technosignature
to look for when we wouldn't
see it to begin with
and wouldn't understand
it if we could.
So we wouldn't see
them until we got here,
which would explain a lot.
>> And it would
probably kill us.
Because if you have something
coming out of warp, so
to speak, and it's something
like an Alcubierre warp drive,
the amount of radiation that
thing is going to kick off
would irradiate half the planet
and cause a mass extinction.
That does not appear
to have happened.
So it just doesn't look
like it occurs unless they
have some way of mitigating it.
But how do you know?
I mean, what would they do?
What would they use?
So you just--
there's just no way
to-- you don't have any physical
indicators that you know about
to look for.
So without that
information about knowing
what to look for first, you
can't really make a detection.
So it's all just guesswork.
And yeah, maybe you can come
up with some ideas in maybe
how you could detect it.
But fundamentally,
it probably would
be something you don't expect.
And I imagine that they
probably don't want you to--
they probably don't want you to
know that they're there, so--
>> Well, part of your research
has focused on the theory
and the suggestion of
Von Neumann probes,
and that would be a way to
go out and not only map,
but check out other exoplanets
and move across the Milky Way
very quickly with a
self-replicating system
in place.
With what is happening today
through our own military
and observations of things
that we can't explain--
the various UAPs, the Tic
Tac videos, the eyewitness
testimony from pilots--
suggests just that.
And Von Neumann, in the late
'40s, came up with this theory,
and it seems that we are
living through it today.
Do you think that's
a possibility
that these civilizations
could have now arrived
through self-replicating probes?
>> Absolutely.
The Fermi paradox is
predicated on the notion
that if you have
enough time, it's
not hard to put a Von Neumann
probe in every star system
in the galaxy.
And the Milky Way is well
old enough, billions of years
old enough, to have done it.
So where are they?
You would expect to see some
evidence of them everywhere.
We don't.
So the one way, in order
to defeat the challenges
of crossing vast
amounts of space time,
is to do it with a
robot that doesn't care
about the passage of time--
your Von Neumann probe.
So it can go and
spend 100,000 years
crossing space to get somewhere.
It's a machine.
It doesn't care, as long
as it's still working.
It just shows up.
Doesn't-- passage of time
doesn't mean anything to it.
There, it could print out--
3D print out anything it wants.
And if it 3D printed
out an atmospheric probe
and entered the Earth's
atmosphere, which
is the most interesting
exoplanet in the system
and someone saw
it, there's a UAP.
So there is a plausible--
completely plausible way
through the Von Neumann
probe to play around
with the idea of the UAP, as the
various groups like the Galileo
Project study them.
>> Now, what about
communication?
Is that something
that we could expect
to see with a technosignature--
how communication
is happening, whether
it's through light
or some other means?
But wouldn't these probes,
whatever they may be,
wouldn't they need to
communicate to a master
situation and then back to
the home planet too as well?
>> If the home planet matters.
If the Von Neumann
probe is like,
I don't care where I'm from.
I'm just here to do a job.
And whatever that job is, you'd
need to know its motivations,
and you can't.
I mean, how do we know?
If it's motivation is to simply
sit here and watch and make
sure that we never develop
artificial intelligence
or nanotechnology, we won't
know anything about it
until we do it.
And then all of a
sudden it stops us,
and that was its
purpose and done.
So highly speculative
as that is,
you just can't know the
motives of such a thing.
So it may not
communicate back home.
Or it may communicate--
again, Clarke tech.
You never know how
it could communicate.
Or it's really directional and
never points its radio signal
towards us.
>> Sure.
And there is also the mention
of certain frequencies.
And this is from the
Department of Defense.
This is also something that
came up in the UFO hearing
with the subcommittee
specifically talking
about these frequencies, and
were we able to lock on to this
and understand what was going
on and what the motivations were
with these different craft
that have been spotted.
Would we be able to lock
on to the home planet
through these frequencies?
And also, a GPS situation
here on our planet where
they may be going to?
Why focus on frequencies?
>> Well, that's a
two-tiered answer.
Because, as you know, radio
has an enormous number
of frequencies--
just a huge dial--
and a signal could be
placed at any of those.
So how do you know where to
look on the dial for the radio
signal?
There, with the UAP--
that's that frequency.
I've heard of it.
I don't know, but it
seems testable to me--
somebody tune to that
frequency and start listening
and see what you get.
As far as the rest
of it, what do
radio astronomers look for are
natural signals where it would
make sense that
everybody in the universe
knows about these frequencies.
So if you put a
signal there, you've
got a better chance of somebody
seeing it than if it's randomly
on the dial somewhere.
And that is the 1420
megahertz hydrogen line.
Neutral, natural hydrogen
emits radio at that frequency.
The gas clouds of the universe
are producing radio waves
at that frequency.
Anybody with science knows that.
No matter where they are
in the observable universe,
they know about that
radio frequency.
So that would be a
good place to put one.
And that's exactly where we
saw the last signal in 1977.
>> If you were running
the James Webb program,
what would you focus
on in the near future?
>> Well, exoplanets
because I'm biased.
I want to see
exoplanet atmospheres
and look for biosignatures.
But that's-- you must leave
plenty of space for astronomy
itself, and to look
at the early universe,
and the things that James
Webb was really designed for--
to study the evolution
of the universe.
So I'd have to temper my
enthusiasm on exoplanets
to make sure that
it got that way.
The thing is, though,
it's in very good hands,
and the management
of the telescope
is doing exactly what they
said they were going to do.
And there's an excellent
plan-- very dynamic plan.
>> What a great conversation.
What did you learn today, Josh?
>> A lot more that I
didn't know before.
Thank you.
That was fascinating.
>> In closing, Bill Nelson
just recently said a few pretty
shocking things.
And as the administrator of
NASA, to come out in public
and say there's life out there.
There's something here.
There's something
visiting us, and it's
NASA's job to figure
this out, and this
is at the top of our list.
Did that surprise you for
the administrator of NASA
to publicly say we're
not alone, and we're
going to figure this out?
>> Well, I was
surprised at that.
I was surprised
that we would even
have a congressional hearing.
I was surprised at many things
that have developed lately.
So I'm just saying--
all I'll say is look into it,
and let me know what you find.
And then we'll talk about it.
>> Fascinating conversation,
John Michael Godier.
Thank you so much.
This is "Into the Vortex."
I'm your host, Jimmy Church.
And Josh and I will
catch you next time.
[AUDIO LOGO]